Doc - zero downtime gateway rollout (#5384)
solo-io/gloo: docs/content/operations/advanced/zero-downtime-gateway-rollout/_index.md

---
title: Zero-downtime Gateway rollout
weight: 25
description: Properly configure Gloo Edge and your Load-Balancer to minimize the downtime when bouncing Envoy proxies.
---

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add the short description, here, too, so it shows up on the page.
```suggestion
Configure Gloo Edge and your load balancer to minimize downtime when bouncing Envoy proxies.
```

## Principles

With distributed systems come reliability patterns that are best to implement.

As services cannot guess the state of their neighborhood, they must implement some mechanisms like health checks, retries, failover, and more.

> If you want to know more about theses principles, please watch out this video:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to know more about theses reliability principles, please watch this video:
```

<p style="text-align: center">
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xYFx0a0W9_E" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</p>

> To implement these principles, you might want to configure your load-balancer to do accurate health checks but also the Kubernetes service representing the Envoy proxy and, of course, Envoy itself. 

Reviewer: Does this mean configure all three of these to do health checks?
```suggestion
To implement these principles, you can configure health checking for your load balancer, the Kubernetes service for the Envoy proxy, and the Envoy proxy itself. 
```

![Overview]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/img/0dt-overview.png" >}})

From right to left:
- **B** - Envoy is not _immediately_ aware of the state of the Kubernetes liveness & readiness probes that are set on an upstream API. So, here are two recommendations:
  - the API should start failing health checks once it receives a SIGTERM signal, and also it should start draining connections gracefully
  - Envoy should be configured with health checks, retries, and outlier detection on these upstreams
- **A** - Depending on your load balancer and network setup, the health check can reach either the Kubernetes nodes or the Kubernetes pods. Keep in mind these rules of thumb:

>   - Cloud LB health checks to the same node should end in the same pod. You can use either a **DaemonSet** with host port or you use Kubernetes **affinity** policies to have at most one Envoy proxy on each node + `ExternalTrafficPolicy: local`

Reviewer: What does the + `ExternalTrafficPolicy: local` mean, like where should this be set?
```suggestion
  - Cloud LB health checks to the same node should end in the same pod. You can use either a **DaemonSet** with host port or you use Kubernetes **affinity** policies to have at most one Envoy proxy on each node, with the `ExternalTrafficPolicy: local` setting in the Envoy proxy deployment.
```

  - configure the health check filter on Envoy. More details below and also in the dedicated [documentation page](/guides/traffic_management/request_processing/health_checks/). Configure the readiness probe accordingly
  - enable the shutdown hook on the Envoy pods. Configure this hook to fail LB health checks once it gets a termination signal

This guide shows how to configure these different elements and demonstrates the benefits during a gateway rollout.

## Configuring the Gloo Edge Proxies

### Upstream options

As explained above, it's best to have your upstream API start failing health checks once it receives a termination signal. Talking Envoy side, you can add retries, health checks and outlier detection as shown below:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: Maybe higlight?
```suggestion
{{< highlight yaml "hl_lines=9 19 24" >}}
```

Author: awesome! I'll add another commit with this syntax!

apiVersion: gloo.solo.io/v1
kind: Upstream
metadata:
  name: default-httpbin-8000
  namespace: gloo-system
spec:
  ...
  # ----- Health Check (a.k.a. active health checks) -------
  healthChecks:
    - healthyThreshold: 1
      httpHealthCheck:
        path: /status/200
      interval: 2s
      noTrafficInterval: 2s
      timeout: 1s
      unhealthyThreshold: 2
      reuseConnection: false
  # ----- Outlier Detection  (a.k.a. passive health checks) ------
  outlierDetection:
    consecutive5xx: 3
    maxEjectionPercent: 100
    interval: 10s
  # ----- Help with consistency between the Kubernetes control-plane and the Gloo control-plane ------
  ignoreHealthOnHostRemoval: true

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< /highlight >}}
```

Reties are set at the route level:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< highlight yaml "hl_lines=17-20" >}}
```

apiVersion: gateway.solo.io/v1
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: httpbin
  namespace: gloo-system
spec:
  virtualHost:
    domains:
      ...
    routes:
    - matchers:
        ...
      routeAction:
        ...
    options:
      # -------- Retries --------
      retries:
        retryOn: 'connect-failure,5xx'
        numRetries: 3
        perTryTimeout: '3s'

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< /highlight >}}
```

While `glooctl check` will help you check some fundamentals, this command will not show if the _gateway-proxy_ is listening to new connections. Only its internal engine - Envoy - knows about that.

It's fair to quickly remember here that Envoy can be listening to multiple hosts and ports simultaneously. For that to happen, you need to define different `Gateways` and `VirtualServices`. If you want to better understand how these objects work together, please check out this [article]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/installation/advanced_configuration/multi-gw-deployment/" %}}).

Once you have these `Gateways` and `VirtualServices` configured, Gloo Edge will generate `Proxy` _Custom Resources_ that will, in turn, generate Envoy **Listeners**, **Routes**, and more. From this point, Envoy is ready to accept new connections. 

The goal here is to know when these [Envoy Listener](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/listeners/listeners) are ready. Luckily, Envoy comes with a handy [Health Check filter](/guides/traffic_management/request_processing/health_checks/) which helps with that.

> Example with Helm values:

Reviewer: Does this mean that they should update a Helm configuration file and upgrade their Helm installation to apply the health check? If so, maybe say this.
```suggestion
For example, you can add the following `healthCheck` setting to your Helm configuration file. Then, upgrade your Helm installation of Gloo Edge to set up health checking for the Envoy proxy.
```

```yaml
gloo:
  gatewayProxies:
    gatewayProxy:
      gatewaySettings:
        customHttpsGateway:
          options:
            healthCheck:
              # define a custom path that is available when the Gateway (Envoy listener) is actually listening
              path: /envoy-hc
```

## Configuring the Kubernetes probes

> As explained above, you need have Envoy to handle shutdown signals gracefully. For that, you leverage the Kubernetes preStop hook as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As explained above, you need have Envoy to handle shutdown signals gracefully. For that, you leverage the Kubernetes `PreStop` hook as shown in the following example:
```

```yaml
gloo:
  gatewayProxies:
    gatewayProxy:
      podTemplate:
        # graceful shutdown: Envoy will fail health checks but only stop after 7 seconds
        terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 7
        gracefulShutdown:
          enabled: true
          sleepTimeSeconds: 5
        probes: true
        # the gateway-proxy pod is ready only when a Gateway (Envoy listener) is listening
        customReadinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            scheme: HTTPS
            port: 8443
            path: /envoy-hc
          failureThreshold: 2
          initialDelaySeconds: 5
          periodSeconds: 5
```

## Configuring a NLB

> In this guide, you will configure an AWS **N**etwork **L**oad **B**alancer. You will need the **AWS Load Balancer Controller**, which brings the annotations-driven configuration to the next level. More rationales are exposed in this article: [Integration with AWS ELBs]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/guides/integrations/aws/" %}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you will configure an AWS Network Load Balancer (NLB). You will need the AWS Load Balancer Controller (ALBC), which brings the annotations-driven configuration to the next level. For more information, see this article: [Integration with AWS ELBs]({{% versioned_link_path fromRoot="/guides/integrations/aws/" %}})
```

With the ALBC (AWS Load Balancer Controller), you will need these special annotations so that the NLB is internet-facing and uses the _instance mode_:

```yaml
# ALBC specifics
service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-type: "external" # https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/service/nlb/#configuration
service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-scheme: internet-facing # https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/service/nlb/
service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-nlb-target-type: "instance" # https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.2/guide/service/nlb/#instance-mode_1
```

Here is an example of how to configure the LB health checks so that they target an Envoy listener with the health check filter enabled:

```yaml
# Health checks

> service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-healthy-threshold: "2" # 2-20

Reviewer: Maybe explain what these are?
```suggestion
service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-healthy-threshold: "2" # Number of retries before failing. Values can be 2-20
```

service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-unhealthy-threshold: "2" # 2-10

> service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-interval: "10" # 10 or 30

Reviewer: Is this in seconds?
```suggestion
service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-interval: "10" # 10s or 30s
```

service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-path: "/envoy-hc" # Envoy HC filter
service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-protocol: "HTTPS"

> service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-port: "traffic-port"

Reviewer: Could these vary? if so, maybe add a comment for how to find the values

Author: yep, I'll add that

> service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-timeout: "6" # 6 is the minimum

Reviewer: Is this in seconds? Maybe say what it is.
```suggestion
service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-timeout: "6" # 6s is the minimum
```

```

## Demo

The demo is based on the following Helm values and also the `VirtualService` and `Upstream` described above in this article:

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add what this step is doing.

```suggestion

Update your Helm configuration to enable the Envoy health checks and the extra annotations for an ALBC.

```

          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-target-group-attributes: "deregistration_delay.timeout_seconds=15,deregistration_delay.connection_termination.enabled=true"
          
          # Backend
          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-backend-protocol: "ssl"
          
          # Health checks
          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-healthy-threshold: "2" # 2-20
          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-unhealthy-threshold: "2" # 2-10
          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-interval: "10" # 10 or 30
          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-path: "/envoy-hc" 
          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-protocol: "HTTPS"
          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-port: "traffic-port"
          service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-timeout: "6" # 6 is the minimum
        
      antiAffinity: true

      podTemplate:
        terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 7 # kill the pod after this delay, gives room to the preStop hook
        gracefulShutdown:
          enabled: true

>           sleepTimeSeconds: 5 # tells envoy to fail healtchecks and sleep 5 seconds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          sleepTimeSeconds: 5 # tells Envoy to fail healthchecks and sleep 5 seconds
```

        probes: true
        customReadinessProbe:
          httpGet:
            scheme: HTTPS
            port: 8443
            path: /envoy-hc
          failureThreshold: 2
          initialDelaySeconds: 5
          periodSeconds: 5
      
      gatewaySettings:
        customHttpsGateway:
          options:
            healthCheck:
              path: /envoy-hc
            httpConnectionManagerSettings:
              useRemoteAddress: true

```

> 

Reviewer: I was a bit confused, are the following steps to take in order? If so, maybe explain what these are doing.

kubectl -n gloo-system rollout restart deploy/gateway-proxy
```

**Grafana dashboards**

![kubectl rollout restart]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/img/0dt-grafana-results-rollout-restart.png" >}})

**Tests results**

```bash
Summary:
  Total:	94.9843 secs
  Slowest:	0.1653 secs
  Fastest:	0.0709 secs
  Average:	0.0830 secs
  Requests/sec:	39.9645

  Total data:	926224 bytes
  Size/request:	244 bytes

Response time histogram:
  0.071 [1]	|
  0.080 [1475]	|■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■
  0.090 [2005]	|■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■
  0.099 [233]	|■■■■■
  0.109 [20]	|
  0.118 [15]	|
  0.128 [4]	|
  0.137 [12]	|
  0.146 [20]	|
  0.156 [10]	|
  0.165 [1]	|

Latency distribution:
  10% in 0.0768 secs
  25% in 0.0789 secs
  50% in 0.0814 secs
  75% in 0.0848 secs
  90% in 0.0887 secs
  95% in 0.0928 secs
  99% in 0.1337 secs

Details (average, fastest, slowest):
  DNS+dialup:	0.0540 secs, 0.0709 secs, 0.1653 secs
  DNS-lookup:	0.0000 secs, 0.0000 secs, 0.0000 secs
  req write:	0.0001 secs, 0.0000 secs, 0.0016 secs
  resp wait:	0.0286 secs, 0.0234 secs, 0.1054 secs
  resp read:	0.0001 secs, 0.0000 secs, 0.0313 secs

Status code distribution:
  [200]	3796 responses

```

> The results show good results and no errors.

Reviewer: Is there something we can link them to for how to interpret these results, or if there were errors, what to do?
